---
layout: blog-post.njk
title: "Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA): The Recommender"
createdAt: "2025-02-09T14:33:00.000Z"
---

Hey,

In this post, I want to dive deep into VPA's **Recommender** component (version 1.3.0), focusing mainly on how it aggregates CPU and memory samples and how the recommendations are calculated. If you're short on time, I provide an overview of VPA in the first section.

Happy reading!

> Disclaimer:
> This post discusses the mechanisms of VPA version 1.3.0. If you are using a later version of VPA, the information in this post may be outdated, as new features or internal workings may have been reworked in newer versions.

# Introduction

VPA is used to fine-tune CPU and memory resource requests and limits automatically, reducing _slack_ (_slack_ refers to the unused or excess resources that are allocated but not utilized). It also ensures that pods do not run out of resources. VPA is an independent community project under the Kubernetes GitHub organization that must be explicitly deployed to your Kubernetes cluster.

At the moment, VPA can only control memory and CPU resources. It needs to be enabled on a per-deployment basis in Kubernetes (although it also supports other objects like StatefulSets, Jobs, CronJobs, DaemonSets, and [anything with a scale subresource that manages pods](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/faq.md#how-can-i-apply-vpa-to-my-custom-resource)) by defining a CRD called `VerticalPodAutoscaler`.

VPA can react to events such as `OOMKilled` by increasing memory and to CPU starvation by increasing CPU requests and limits. Only resource requests are calculated based on historical (if available) and current usage metrics, while limits are set proportionally based on the initially defined request-to-limit ratio. If we omit limits, VPA will not set them for us - it will only calculate and set resource requests.

It is recommended to combine VPA with Cluster Autoscaler (CA) or Karpenter. Without them, VPA may increase resource requests, but if there isn't enough available memory or CPU, the pod may fail to deploy.

VPA is great because, without it, people tend to overprovision their workloads to avoid out-of-memory (OOM) errors and CPU throttling. However, this leads to wasted resources, which can become costly at scale. On the other hand, some underprovision their workloads, resulting in OOM errors and CPU throttling. Others may manually rightsize their workloads based on extensive load testing, but resource requests and limits can quickly become outdated as usage patterns change or the application evolves. VPA solves this by automatically rightsizing workloads within Kubernetes, ensuring efficient resource allocation and adapting to changing usage patterns.

VPA is not the ideal choice if your application is sensitive to disruptions or has difficulty handling pod termination (e.g. don't support graceful termination). It may not be suitable if your clients cannot manage retries during disruptions. This is because VPA may evict your pods to apply the recommended resource values - more on that later.

VPA consists of three components (each running as a separate pod):
- **Recommender**: Analyzes metrics and generates recommendations. It also considers pod events, such as OOM errors.
- **Updater**: Checks if the resource configuration of managed pods has significantly diverged from the recommendations. If so, it attempts to evict them. The Updater only evict pods with `updatePolicy.mode` set to `Auto` in the `VerticalPodAutoscaler` CRD.
	- The Updater also respects `PodDisruptionBudget` objects.
- **Admission Controller**: When a pod is evicted by the **Updater** and matches a `VerticalPodAutoscaler` object, the Admission Controller updates its `pod.spec` with the recommended resource requests (`Target` value from `VerticalPodAutoscaler` CRD).

VPA offers multiple modes, which need to be set in the `VerticalPodAutoscaler` CRD:
- **Off** (aka dry run): Only suggests resource request values, recommendations can be fetched from the `VerticalPodAutoscaler` CRD. This is a non-disruptive mode and is still useful because we can evaluate the recommended values and manually apply them to our workloads. Only the **Recommender** is used in this mode.
- **Initial**: Assigns resource requests only during pod creation, not afterwards. This mode will not disrupt or evict already running pods - you'd need to manually kill pods to apply the recommended values via the Admission Controller automatically. Basically, this mode is useful if you want to have control over pod evictions. In this mode, continuous OOM errors and CPU starvation will not be prevented automatically. The **Recommender** and **Admission Controller** are used in this mode.
- **Auto**: Applies recommendations at pod creation and later, by evicting running pods if the Updater decides to do so. Pods that fall outside the defined range (i.e., below the `LowerBound`/computed lower percentile or above the `UpperBound`/computed upper percentile) will be proactively evicted. This is the most disruptive mode. All three components (**Recommender**, **Updater**, and **Admission Controller**) are used in this mode.

VPA does not account for the individual needs of single pods - over time, all pods within the same workload (e.g. Kubernetes Deployment) will receive the same recommendation. This can lead to significant resource waste if some pods require more or fewer resources than others within the same workload. We can reduce this risk by evenly distributing the load across our pods.

If there are PodDisruptionBudget (PDB) objects in your cluster, consider using them with the new `AlwaysAllow` option to support your workload. This option can help remove a pod from an `OOMKilled` `CrashLoopBackoff` state when the PDB is or would be violated.

With VPA, two new CRDs are introduced. Let's dive into them more deeply in the next two sections:
# VerticalPodAutoscaler CRD

- In the following sections, I will refer to this CRD as the _VPA object_.
- This API object is used to enable VPA for a set of replicated pods, such as Deployments, StatefulSets, etc.
- The recommended optimal amount of resources from the VPA is presented in the `status.recommendation.containerRecommendations.target` field. Let's now explain the entire `Status` block, which is generated by the Recommender component:
    - The following three values are capped based on the `minAllowed` and `maxAllowed` container policies defined in the VPA object:
        - `Target`: The recommended optimal amount of resources, used by Admission Controller to set resource requests.
        - `LowerBound`: The recommended minimum amount of resources. This amount is not guaranteed to be sufficient for the application to remain stable.
        - `UpperBound`: The recommended maximum amount of resources. Resource requests higher than these values are likely to be wasted.
    - `UncappedTarget`: This is an estimated target calculated without considering the `minAllowed` or `maxAllowed` restrictions. It is NOT used by any component but serves as an indicator.
- As I previously mentioned, the Updater component of the VPA uses `LowerBound` and `UpperBound` to determine whether a new recommendation (`Target`) should be applied by evicting a pod.

Here's a sample VPA object with additional comments explaining some of its fields:

```yaml
apiVersion: autoscaling.k8s.io/v1
kind: VerticalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: randomDeployment
  namespace: default
spec:
  targetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: randomDeployment
  updatePolicy:
    updateMode: 'Auto'
  resourcePolicy:
    containerPolicies:
        // this scaling policy will apply to every container
      - containerName: '*'
        // specifies the minimal amount of resources that will be recommended
        minAllowed:
          memory: 50Mi
        // specifies the maximum amount of resources that will be recommended
        maxAllowed:
          memory: 500Mi
        // type of recommendations that will be computed
        controlledResources:
          - memory
        // which resource values should be controlled
        controlledValues: 'RequestsAndLimits'
Status:
  // calculated by the Recommender
  Recommendation:
    Container Recommendations:
      Container Name:  container1
      Lower Bound:
        Cpu:     25m
        Memory:  52428800
      Target:
        Cpu:     30m
        Memory:  102428800
      Uncapped Target:
        Cpu:     35m
        Memory:  132428800
      Upper Bound:
        Cpu:     35m
        Memory:  132428800
```

# VerticalPodAutoscalerCheckpoint CRD

- I will refer to this CRD as the _checkpoint object_ in the following sections.
- The checkpoint object contains a summary of the observed usage of a container or multiple containers. These checkpoint objects serve as persistent storage for the Recommender in case it loses its state (i.e., `ClusterState`) when its pod is restarted or crashes. Only the usage metrics of containers that are under a VPA object are checkpointed. We can use Prometheus as an alternative to fetch historical usage data instead of checkpoint objects by providing its address via a flag.
- Garbage collection of orphaned checkpoints:
    - Orphaned checkpoint objects (checkpoints with no matching VPA) are garbage collected by the Recommender.
    - By default, this cleanup occurs every 10 minutes (controlled by the `--checkpoints-gc-interval` flag).
    - In larger clusters, where there are many namespaces, it makes sense to increase the `--kube-api-burst` and `--kube-api-qps` flags to limit requests to the Kubernetes API server and avoid throttling. Another option is to adjust the `--checkpoints-gc-interval` flag to reduce the frequency of orphaned checkpoint checks across all namespaces.

# Handling OOMKilled events

The Recommender monitors pod eviction events. If a pod is evicted due to an `OOMKilled` event, the Recommender increases the memory in the corresponding VPA object. If the mode is set to `auto`, the pod is then recreated. It sets the memory request to the last observed maximum memory usage and adds an additional 20% (the constant `DefaultOOMBumpUpRatio`) to help mitigate future OOM errors.

# Handling CPU Starvation

After a while, the VPA will recreate pods experiencing CPU starvation if we have created the corresponding VPA object with `updatePolicy.mode` set to `Auto`.

# Recommender's loop

Now, let's first discuss the most important component of VPA - the Recommender - starting with two Golang structs that I consider important.

* The `ClusterState` struct holds the Recommender's state. It is well-documented in the code, detailing the data it stores, starting from [this line](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/model/cluster.go#L38).
* All CPU and memory usage measurements from running containers are aggregated in the Recommender's memory into a map with the value type `AggregateContainerState`, where the keys are composite literals consisting of the namespace, container name, and pod labels. During aggregation, usage samples are stored as decaying histograms (`AggregateCPUUsage` and `AggregateMemoryPeaks`), which are part of `AggregateContainerState` and serve as input for calculating resource request recommendations. For example, two CPU samples from containers with the same name, in the same namespace, and sharing the same pod labels are added to the same histogram. Each Kubernetes deployment (or similar target object) has a single `AggregateContainerState` struct, which includes two histograms: one for CPU distribution and another for peak memory distribution.

Resource requests for pods are calculated based on both historical (if available) and current resource usage. Historical data is available if the Recommender has been running for a longer period, as it gathers data from the Kubernetes Metrics Server and aggregates it into its memory by default. Another option to collect historical resource usage data is to pass the Prometheus address through a flag to the Recommender.

The calculation of resource requests involves the following steps (detailed breakdown of the VPA algorithm follows):

- **Recommender Initialization**: When the Recommender first starts, it attempts to load historical usage data into the `ClusterState`. By default, it retrieves this data from existing checkpoint objects, but if configured, it can also pull historical metrics from Prometheus as I already mentioned.
- **Recommender Loop**: The Recommender operates in a continuous loop, running at intervals specified by the `--recommender-interval` flag. In each iteration, it performs the following steps, as defined in the [RunOnce method](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/main.go#L314):

### Update ClusterState with VPA objects (LoadVPAs func)

It loads the existing VPA objects' `Status` and `Spec` into the `ClusterState`, including recently computed values such as `Target`, `LowerBound`, `UpperBound`, and `UncappedTarget`.

### Update ClusterState with Pod and Container Details (LoadPods func)

Basic pod (`PodState`) and container specifications (`ContainerState`) are loaded into the `ClusterState`, including labels attached to the pod, the containers belonging to the pod, current resource requests, container images, etc. Note that CPU and memory usage are collected in the next step.

If the loaded container does not already have an `AggregateContainerState` structure, one is created during this step. This includes initializing empty decaying histograms for CPU and memory usage. [Link to code](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/model/cluster.go#L345).

If the Recommender is running with the `--memory-saver` flag, it only tracks pods and containers that have an associated VPA object.

### Update ClusterState with usage metrics (LoadRealTimeMetrics func)

By default, the current CPU and memory usage data is collected from the Kubernetes Metrics Server (KMS) for containers, with CPU measured in millicores and memory in bytes. For each container running in the cluster, usage data for each resource is gathered over a specified duration (indicated by the `SnapshotWindow` field) from the KMS.

Metrics collection can be restricted to a specific namespace using the `--vpa-object-namespace` flag. By default, metrics are collected across all namespaces and for all running containers.

At this stage, the Recommender attempts to aggregate each individual CPU and memory usage sample. To better understand this process, let's consider a sample Kubernetes deployment named `resource-consumer`, running in the default namespace with two pod replicas, each pod contains a single container named `resource-consumer`:

```
Pod: resource-consumer-748f7fc9b6-9mg4n
  └─ Container: resource-consumer

Pod: resource-consumer-748f7fc9b6-hsmtb
  └─ Container: resource-consumer
```

Based on this deployment, we will collect two snapshots from the KMS - one for each container:

First snapshot `ContainerMetricsSnapshot[0]`:

```json
{
    "ID": {
        "PodID": {
            "Namespace": "default",
            "PodName": "resource-consumer-748f7fc9b6-9mg4n"
        },
        "ContainerName": "resource-consumer"
    },
    "SnapshotTime": "2025-02-01T08:06:44Z",
    "SnapshotWindow": "12393000000",
    "Usage": [
            "cpu": "233",
            "memory": "93356032"
    ]
}
```

Second snapshot `ContainerMetricsSnapshot[1]`:

```json
{
    "ID": {
        "PodID": {
            "Namespace": "default",
            "PodName": "resource-consumer-748f7fc9b6-hsmtb"
        },
        "ContainerName": "resource-consumer"
    },
    "SnapshotTime": "2025-02-01T08:06:48Z",
    "SnapshotWindow": "12216000000",
    "Usage": [
            "cpu": "233",
            "memory": "93274112"
    ]
}
```


As you can see, the CPU usage for both pods is the same, while their memory usage differs slightly. Next, we loop through all the snapshots (in this case, there are just two). This means we have 2 CPU samples and 2 memory samples to aggregate. 

Let's take a look at how one CPU sample aggregation works:

```json
{
    "ContainerUsageSample": {
        "MeasureStart": "2025-02-01T08:06:44Z",
        "Usage": 233,
        "Request": 0,
        "Resource": "cpu"
    },
    "Container": {
        "PodID": {
            "Namespace": "default",
            "PodName": "resource-consumer-748f7fc9b6-9mg4n"
        },
        "ContainerName": "resource-consumer"
    }
}
```

A CPU sample is [discarded](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob//vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/model/container.go#L81) (i.e., not added to the CPU histogram) if its `MeasureStart` timestamp is later than the start timestamp of the last CPU sample that was already aggregated into the histogram. This helps prevent the addition of duplicate or out-of-order CPU samples.

CPU `Usage` is converted into CPU cores, meaning that 233 milicores of `Usage` are converted to 0.233 CPU cores. Next, we determine the weight of the CPU sample, which is set to 0.1 by default. The next step is to multiply the weight by the value returned from the decaying factor method (`decayFactor`). The decaying factor is used to reduce the sample's weight ("importance") by half for each `halfLife` period, meaning that newer samples receive a higher weight than older ones. By default, the `halfLife` is set to 24 hours. In our example, the decaying factor is 161.793, which is then multiplied by 0.1 to give the final weight of 16.1793. Below is an example of how the decaying factor method's return value increases as the `MeasureStart` timestamp increases:


```go
func main() {
	sampleTime1, _ := time.Parse(time.RFC3339, "2025-02-01T08:06:44Z") //current timestamp
	sampleTime2, _ := time.Parse(time.RFC3339, "2025-02-01T08:12:44Z") //timestamp shifted +6 mins
	sampleTime3, _ := time.Parse(time.RFC3339, "2025-02-02T08:08:44Z") //timestamp shifted +1 day
	referenceTimestamp, _ := time.Parse(time.RFC3339, "2025-01-25T00:00:00Z")

	HalfLife := time.Hour * 24

	// calculating the decaying factor
	fmt.Println(float64(math.Exp2(float64(sampleTime1.Sub(referenceTimestamp)) / float64(HalfLife))))
	fmt.Println(float64(math.Exp2(float64(sampleTime2.Sub(referenceTimestamp)) / float64(HalfLife))))
	fmt.Println(float64(math.Exp2(float64(sampleTime3.Sub(referenceTimestamp)) / float64(HalfLife))))

	// Outputs:
	// 161.79343499365757
	// 162.26138818303303
	// 323.8985384947324
}
```

Now that we have an usage value (0.233), a final weight (16.1793 = 161.793 * 0.1), and a timestamp (2025-02-01T08:06:44Z), we are ready to aggregate this CPU sample. The Recommender will then find the Kubernetes deployment's CPU histogram to which the sample should belong. Let's assume this is the CPU histogram before aggregation:

```
bucketWeight: [1,2,3,4,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0....]
totalWeight: 10,
minBucket: 0, // Index of the first non-empty bucket
maxBucket: 3 // Index of the last non-empty bucket
firstBucketSize: 0.01,
ratio: 1.05,
epsilon: 0.0001
numBuckets: 176
```


Next, we determine the bucket's index using the [FindBucket](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/util/histogram_options.go#L120) method. CPU histograms use an exponential bucketing scheme, with the smallest bucket size being 0.01 core and a maximum of 1000.0 cores. With the above-mentioned parameters, such as `firstBucketSize`, `ratio` and `numBuckets`, the first bucket starts at 0 with index 0, the second at 0.01, and the third at 0.020499. The start of a bucket with a given index is calculated using the [GetBucketStart](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/util/histogram_options.go#L134) method:

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"math"
)

var ratio float64 = 1.05
//var firstBucketSize float64 = 10000000 // 10 MB
var firstBucketSize float64 = 0.01 // 10 milicore
var numBuckets int = 176 // 176 for CPU and memory histograms

func GetBucketStart(bucket int) float64 {
	if bucket < 0 || bucket >= numBuckets {
		panic(fmt.Sprintf("index %d out of range [0..%d]", bucket, numBuckets-1))
	}
	if bucket == 0 {
		return 0.0
	}
	return firstBucketSize * (math.Pow(ratio, float64(bucket)) - 1) / (ratio - 1)
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println(GetBucketStart(0))
	fmt.Println(GetBucketStart(1))
	fmt.Println(GetBucketStart(2))
	fmt.Println(GetBucketStart(3))
}
// Outputs:
// 0
// 0.01
// 0.020499999999999987
// 0.031525
```

Okay, in our example, with a usage of 0.233 CPU cores, the bucket index would be 15. Once we identify the bucket index, we add the new weight (16.1793) to it. The updated `bucketWeight[15]` will be 16.1793:

```
bucketWeight: [1,2,3,4,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,16.1793,0....]
totalWeight: 26,1793,
minBucket: 0, // Index of the first non-empty bucket
maxBucket: 15 // Index of the last non-empty bucket
firstBucketSize: 0.01,
ratio: 1.05,
epsilon: 0.0001
```


Now that we've aggregated one CPU sample for a container, let's look at how a single Memory sample is aggregated in the following:

```json
{
    "ContainerUsageSample": {
        "MeasureStart": "2025-02-01T08:06:44Z",
        "Usage": 93356032,
        "Request": 0,
        "Resource": "memory"
    },
    "Container": {
        "PodID": {
            "Namespace": "default",
            "PodName": "resource-consumer-748f7fc9b6-9mg4n"
        },
        "ContainerName": "resource-consumer"
    }
}
```

Each new memory sample is compared against the peak memory usage within the current aggregation interval, the end of which is stored in the container's `WindowEnd` field. VPA uses peak memory rather than the entire distribution (as it does with CPU), because we typically want to provision for (or near) the peak memory usage. The current peak memory is stored in the `oomPeak` field within the container's `ContainerState` struct. The aggregation interval can be adjusted using the `--memory-aggregation-interval` flag, with the default set to one day.

The comparison takes place at [this line](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/model/container.go#L148), and here are the steps involved:

1. If the new memory sample is larger than the current peak and its timestamp is earlier than the end of the current aggregation interval (`WindowEnd`), the Recommender follows these steps:
    1. Subtract the old peak memory sample's weight from the Memory Histogram using [this method](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/util/decaying_histogram.go#L69). The method uses the old peak value in bytes, the weight (calculated as 1.0 * `decayFactor(WindowEnd)`), and the timestamp (which is the container's `WindowEnd`).
    2. Add the new peak's weight to the Memory histogram's appropriate bucket based on the new peak value. This is done using the [AddSample](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/util/decaying_histogram.go#L65) method. The bucket index for the new weight is returned by the `FindBucket` method. The arguments for the `AddSample` method are:
        1. New peak memory usage in bytes
        2. Weight, calculated as 1.0 * `decayFactor(WindowEnd)`
        3. Timestamp, which is the container's `WindowEnd`
2. If the new memory sample is smaller than the current peak within the current aggregation interval (`WindowEnd`), we don't aggregate the new sample. Instead, we simply move on to the next memory sample.

If the aggregation window ends, we set the peak memory to 0, as we're moving to the next interval ([link](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/model/container.go#L161-L166)). Of course, we add the current memory sample as the new peak.

Memory histograms use an exponential bucketing scheme (just like CPU histograms), with the smallest bucket size being 10MB and the maximum size being 1TB. The bucket with index 0 starts at 0, the next starts at 10 MB, followed by 20.49 MB, and then 31.5249 MB (calculated by `GetBucketStart` func).

Now that we've aggregated all the CPU and memory samples, we can move to the next step.

### Update the status field of the VPA objects (UpdateVPAs func)

At this step, the `status` field of all the VPA CRD objects is updated, meaning that recommendations - `Target` and other values like `UpperBound`, `LowerBound`, and `UncappedTarget` are calculated. Here's the process for calculating these values for one aggregated container state (`AggregateContainerState`):

1. Find the CPU and Memory distributions: The `AggregateCPUUsage` and `AggregateMemoryPeaks` are retrieved.
2. Return specific percentiles: The Recommender returns percentiles of the CPU and memory peak distributions:
    - p50 (the median) for the `LowerBound`
    - p90 for the `Target`
    - p95 for the `UpperBound`
3. Add a safety margin: A safety margin is added to all three values, with a default of +15%.
4. Check against "min" flags : The values for `LowerBound`, `UpperBound`, and `Target` are compared against the values specified by the flags `--pod-recommendation-min-cpu-millicores` and `--pod-recommendation-min-memory-mb`. If the calculated values are lower than the values set by the flags, the flag values are used instead.
5. Apply confidence multiplier: If calculating the `LowerBound` or `UpperBound`, a confidence multiplier is applied to these values (I will explain the confidence multiplier later).

Afterward, `UncappedTarget` is set to be the same as the `Target`. The values for `Target`, `UpperBound`, and `LowerBound` are then checked against the limits set in the VPA object (`minAllowed` and `maxAllowed`), and they are adjusted to comply with the policies.

### Maintaining checkpoints

In this step, the Recommender serializes the aggregated historical usage of containers into checkpoint statuses, which are associated with VPA objects. For example, a CPU and memory histogram for a container with the same name, the same pod labels, and within the same namespace will be stored in a single checkpoint object.

New weights are derived from `AggregateCPUUsage` and `AggregateMemoryPeaks`, as illustrated based on the following sample histogram:

```
bucketWeight: [957.41,8.87,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0....]
totalWeight: 966.28,
minBucket: 0, // Index of the first non-empty bucket
maxBucket: 1 // Index of the last non-empty bucket
firstBucketSize: 0.01,
ratio: 1.05,
epsilon: 0.0001
```


1. We obtain the `max` weight, which corresponds to the bucket at index 0 with a weight of 957.41.
2. We compute the `ratio` as:  
    `ratio := float64(10000) / max`
3. Then, for each bucket, we calculate the new weight by multiplying its weight by the `ratio`, and rounding the result.

The new bucket weights are calculated as follows, using a ratio of 10.444:

```
BucketWeights: map[int]uint32 [
	0: 10000,
	1: 93
],
TotalWeight: 966.28
```

Next, we save the updated buckets with their new weights, along with additional fields like `TotalWeight`, `FirstSampleStart`, `TotalSamplesCount`, etc... into a checkpoint object. If the checkpoint object does not exist, it will be created.

Orphaned checkpoints are also garbage collected at this step, as mentioned earlier in the VerticalPodAutoscalerCheckpoint CRD section.

### Garbage collection of obsolete aggregated usage measurements

Obsolete `AggregateContainerState` objects are garbage collected every hour by default, as defined by the `aggregateContainerStateGCInterval` constant.

An `AggregateContainerState` becomes obsolete if, for example, its last sample is older than 8 days ([reference](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.3.0/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/recommender/model/cluster.go#L364)), or if the `TotalSamplesCount` equals 0 and there is no controller attached to the pods (e.g., Deployment).

# Confidence multiplier

The most accurate recommendations are achieved by allowing the Recommender to collect 8 days' worth of usage metrics. Without historical data, the Recommender will rely solely on current usage metrics, which can result in a higher `UpperBound` and a lower `LowerBound` to avoid potential evictions. However, thanks to the confidence multiplier in the algorithm, as more historical usage data is gathered, both the `UpperBound` and `LowerBound` will converge closer to the `Target`. The `LowerBound` tends to converge much faster than the `UpperBound` because upscaling can be done more freely than downscaling.

# Prometheus

To obtain stable recommendations immediately, we should connect Prometheus to the Recommender as a history provider instead of relying on checkpoint objects or `AggregateContainerState` structs, which may not be available for a specific group of pods. Here are the flags I used to successfully fetch historical data from Prometheus into the Recommender's memory:

```
--storage=prometheus
--prometheus-address=http://prometheus-operated.monitoring.svc.cluster.local:9090
--prometheus-cadvisor-job-name=kubelet
--pod-namespace-label=namespace
--pod-name-label=pod
--metric-for-pod-labels=kube_pod_labels{job="kube-state-metrics"}[8d]
--container-pod-name-label=pod
--container-name-label=container
```

# Summary

To summarize, by default, the Recommender collects usage metrics for all running containers and saves them to its memory every minute. These metrics are aggregated into decaying histograms, which are periodically checkpointed for containers managed by a VPA object. The checkpoints act as persistent storage, ensuring data is retained if the Recommender pod is restarted, killed, or crashes.

If the Recommender has been running for some time and we create a VPA object, we can expect more stable recommendations for our set of pods, especially if they have been running for a couple of days after the Recommender was started in the cluster. A more reliable way to obtain stable recommendations immediately is to connect Prometheus to the Recommender as a history provider, rather than relying on checkpoint objects.

VPA is a powerful tool for automatically rightsizing workloads and reducing resource _slack_. However, it may not be suitable for everyone. For example, if your workloads cannot tolerate disruptions or have a bursty usage pattern, VPA might not be the best fit for you.